Boiling
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Boiling water in a sealed cooking pot
Boiling is the rapid vaporization of a liquid, which occurs when a
liquid is heated to its boiling point, the temperature at which the
vapour pressure of the liquid is equal to the pressure exerted on
the liquid by the surrounding atmosphere. The higher the pressure
the higher the boiling point. There are two main types of boiling;
nucleate boiling where small bubbles of vapour form at discrete
points, and critical heat flux boiling where the boiling surface is
heated above a certain critical temperature and a film of vapor
forms on the surface. Transition boiling is an intermediate,
unstable form of boiling with elements of both types. The boiling
point of water is 100 °C or 212 °F, but is lower with the decreased
atmospheric pressure found at higher altitudes.
Boiling water is used as a method of making it potable by killing
microbes that may be present. The sensitivity of different microorganisms to heat varies, but if water is held at 70 °C (158 °F) for
ten minutes, many organisms are killed, but some are more resistant
to heat and require one minute at the boiling point of water.
Clostridium spores can survive this treatment, but as the infection
caused by this microbe is not water-borne, this is not a problem.
Boiling is also used in cooking. Foods suitable for boiling include
vegetables, starchy foods such as rice, noodles and potatoes, eggs,
meats, sauces, stocks and soups. As a cooking method it is simple
and suitable for large scale cookery. Tough meats or poultry can be
given a long, slow cooking and a nutritious stock is produced.
Disadvantages include loss of water-soluble vitamins and minerals.
Commercially prepared foodstuffs are sometimes packed in polythene
sachets and sold as "boil-in-the-bag" products.
Contents [hide]
1
Types
1.1
Nucleate
1.2
Critical heat flux
1.3
Transition
1.4
Film
2
Uses
2.1
For making water potable
2.2
In cooking
2.3
Boil-in-the-bag
3
Contrast with evaporation
4
See also
5
References
Types[edit]
Nucleate[edit]
Nucleate boiling of water over a kitchen stove burner
Nucleate boiling is characterized by the growth of bubbles or pops
on a heated surface, which rise from discrete points on a surface,
whose temperature is only slightly above the liquid’s. In general,

the number of nucleation sites are increased by an increasing
surface temperature.
An irregular surface of the boiling vessel (i.e., increased surface
roughness) or additives to the fluid (i.e., surfactants and/or
nanoparticles[1]) can create additional nucleation sites,[2] while
an exceptionally smooth surface, such as plastic, lends itself to
superheating. Under these conditions, a heated liquid may show
boiling delay and the temperature may go somewhat above the boiling
point without boiling.
Critical heat flux[edit]
As the boiling surface is heated above a critical temperature, a
film of vapor forms on the surface. Since this vapor film is much
less capable of carrying heat away from the surface, the temperature
rises very rapidly beyond this point into the transition boiling
regime. The point at which this occurs is dependent on the
characteristics of boiling fluid and the heating surface in
question.[1]
Transition[edit]
Transition boiling may be defined as the unstable boiling, which
occurs at surface temperatures between the maximum attainable in
nucleate and the minimum attainable in film boiling.
The formation of bubbles in a heated liquid is a complex physical
process which often involves cavitation and acoustic effects, such
as the broad-spectrum hiss one hears in a kettle not yet heated to
the point where bubbles boil to the surface.
Film[edit]
Main article: Leidenfrost effect
If a surface heating the liquid is significantly hotter than the
liquid then film boiling will occur, where a thin layer of vapor,
which has low thermal conductivity, insulates the surface. This
condition of a vapor film insulating the surface from the liquid
characterizes film boiling.
In distillation, boiling is used in separating mixtures. This is
possible because the vapor rising from a boiling fluid generally has
a ratio of components different from that in the liquid.
Uses[edit]
For making water potable[edit]
As a method of disinfecting water, bringing it to its boiling point
at 100 °C (212 °F), is the oldest and most effective way since it
does not affect the taste, it is effective despite contaminants or
particles present in it, and is a single step process which
eliminates most microbes responsible for causing intestine related
diseases.[3] In places having a proper water purification system, it
is recommended only as an emergency treatment method or for
obtaining potable water in the wilderness or in rural areas,[4] as
it cannot remove chemical toxins or impurities.[5]

The elimination of micro-organisms by boiling follows first-order
kinetics—at high temperatures it is achieved in less time and at
lower temperatures, in more time. The heat sensitivity of microorganisms varies, at 70 °C (158 °F), Giardia species (causes
Giardiasis) can take ten minutes for complete inactivation, most
intestine affecting microbes and E. coli (gastroenteritis) take less
than a minute; at boiling point, Vibrio cholerae (cholera) takes ten
seconds and hepatitis A virus (causes the symptom of jaundice), one
minute. Boiling does not ensure the elimination of all microorganisms; the bacterial spores Clostridium can survive at 100 °C
(212 °F) but are not water-borne or intestine affecting. Thus for
human health, complete sterilization of water is not required.[3]
The traditional advice of boiling water for ten minutes is mainly
for additional safety, since microbes start getting eliminated at
temperatures greater than 60 °C (140 °F) and bringing it to its
boiling point is also a useful indication that can be seen without
the help of a thermometer, and by this time, the water is
disinfected. Though the boiling point decreases with increasing
altitude, it is not enough to affect the disinfecting process.[3][6]
In cooking[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please
help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2017) (Learn
how and when to remove this template message)
Boiling pasta
Boiling is the method of cooking food in boiling water, or other
water-based liquids such as stock or milk.[7] Simmering is gentle
boiling, while in poaching the cooking liquid moves but scarcely
bubbles.
The boiling point of water is typically considered to be 100 °C or
212 °F. Pressure and a change in composition of the liquid may alter
the boiling point of the liquid. For this reason, high elevation
cooking generally takes longer since boiling point is a function of
atmospheric pressure. In Denver, Colorado, USA, which is at an
elevation of about one mile, water boils at approximately 95 °C or
203 °F.[8] Depending on the type of food and the elevation, the
boiling water may not be hot enough to cook the food properly.
Similarly, increasing the pressure as in a pressure cooker raises
the temperature of the contents above the open air boiling point.
Adding a water soluble substance, such as salt or sugar also
increases the boiling point. This is called boiling-point elevation.
At palatable concentrations of salt, the effect is very small, and
the boiling point elevation is difficult to notice. However, while
making thick sugar syrup, such as for Gulab Jamun, one will notice
boiling point elevation. Due to variations in composition and
pressure, the boiling point of water is almost never exactly 100 °C,
but rather close enough for cooking.

Boiling milk
Foods suitable for boiling include vegetables, starchy foods such as
rice, noodles and potatoes, eggs, meats, sauces, stocks and soups.
Boiling has several advantages. It is safe and simple, and it is
appropriate for large-scale cookery. Older, tougher, cheaper cuts of
meat and poultry can be made digestible. Nutritious, well flavored
stock is produced. Also, maximum color and nutritive value is
retained when cooking green vegetables, provided boiling time is
kept to the minimum.
Boiling food over a fireplace
On the other hand, there are several disadvantages. There is a loss
of soluble vitamins from foods to the water (if the water is
discarded). Boiling can also be a slow method of cooking food.
Boiling can be done in several ways: The food can be placed into
already rapidly boiling water and left to cook, the heat can be
turned down and the food can be simmered; or the food can also be
placed into the pot, and cold water may be added to the pot. This
may then be boiled until the food is satisfactory.
Water on the outside of a pot, i.e., a wet pot, increases the time
it takes the pot of water to boil. The pot will heat at a normal
rate once all excess water on the outside of the pot evaporates.
Boiling is also often used to remove salt from certain foodstuffs,
such as bacon, if a less saline product is required.
Boil-in-the-bag[edit]
Main article: Boil-in-bag
See also: Sous-vide
Also known as "boil-in-bag", this involves heating or cooking readymade foods sealed in a thick plastic bag. The bag containing the
food, often frozen, is submerged in boiling water for a prescribed
time.[9] The resulting dishes can be prepared with greater
convenience as no pots or pans are dirtied in the process. Such
meals are available for camping as well as home dining.
Contrast with evaporation[edit]
At any given temperature, all the molecules in a liquid do not have
the same kinetic energy. Some high energy particles on the liquid
surface may have enough energy to escape the intermolecular forces
of attraction of the liquid and become a gas. This is called
evaporation.
Evaporation only happens on the surface while boiling happens
throughout the liquid. When a liquid reaches its boiling point
bubbles of gas form in it which rise into the surface and burst into
the air. This process is called boiling. If the boiling liquid is
heated more strongly the temperature does not rise but it boils more
quickly.

See also[edit]
Phase diagram
Phase transition
Explosive boiling or phase explosion
Recovery time (culinary)
Broiling
References[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boiling.
Look up boiling in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on
Boiling
^ Jump up to: a b Taylor, R.A., Phelan, P.E., Pool boiling of
nanofluids: Comprehensive review of existing data and limited new
data, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Volume 52,
Issues 23–24, November 2009, Pages 5339–5347
Jump up ^ Robert A Taylor, Patrick E Phelan, Todd Otanicar, Ronald J
Adrian, Ravi S Prasher, Vapor generation in a nanoparticle liquid
suspension using a focused, continuous laser, Applied Physics
Letters, Volume:95 , Issue: 16, 2009
^ Jump up to: a b c Howard Backer (2002). "Water Disinfection for
International and Wilderness Travelers". Oxford journals. pp. 355–
364. doi:10.1086/324747. Retrieved 20 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "Emergency Disinfection of Drinking Water". EPA. Retrieved
20 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "OA Guide to Water Purification, The Backpacker's Field
Manual, by Rick Curtis, first edition published by Random House
March, 1998".
Jump up ^ "Is it true that you can't make a decent cup of tea up a
mountain?". physics.org. Retrieved 2 November 2012.
Jump up ^ Rickus, Alexis; Saunder, Bev; Mackey, Yvonne (2016-08-22).
AQA GCSE Food Preparation and Nutrition. Hodder Education. ISBN
9781471863653.
Jump up ^ IAPWS. "What is the effect of pressure on the boiling of
water? Why does water boil at a lower temperature at high
altitudes?". FAQs About Water and Steam. Archived from the original
on 2009-08-06. Retrieved 2009-12-05.
Jump up ^ "Boil-in-bag - Define Boil-in-bag at Dictionary.com".
Dictionary.com.

